[Doc] Sleep mode documentation (#22310)
vllm-project/vllm: docs/features/sleep_mode.md

# Sleep Mode

vLLM's **Sleep Mode** allows you to temporarily release most GPU memory used by a model, including model weights and KV cache, without stopping the server or unloading the Docker container. This is especially useful for RLHF, training, or cost-saving scenarios where GPU resources need to be freed between inference workloads.

> ## **Benefits**

Author: Updated, thanks

- **Frees GPU memory**: Offloads model weights to CPU RAM and discards KV cache, releasing up to 90%+ of GPU memory for other tasks.
- **Fast resume**: Quickly wake up the engine and resume inference without full model reload.
- **API endpoints**: Control sleep/wake state via HTTP endpoints or Python API.
- **Supports distributed workloads**: Works with tensor parallelism.
- **Fine-grained control**: Optionally wake up only model weights or KV cache to avoid OOM during weight updates.

## Usage

### Offline inference

Enable sleep mode by passing `enable_sleep_mode=True` to the `LLM` class.

```python
from vllm import LLM
llm = LLM("Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B", enable_sleep_mode=True)
```

### Python API

```python
# Put the engine to sleep (level=1: offload weights to CPU RAM, discard KV cache)
llm.sleep(level=1)

# Wake up the engine (restore weights)

> llm.wake_up()# or llm.wake_up(tags=["weights"]) for fine-grained control

Reviewer: You haven't explained what is `tags` yet, so I'd leave that for the next section

```python
# Put engine to deep sleep (level=2)
llm.sleep(level=2)
# ... Get the new weights
# Wake up only weights to avoid OOM
llm.wake_up(tags=["weights"])
# ... Update the weights
# Optionally, wake up KV cache after weights are updated
llm.wake_up(tags=["kv_cache"])
```

---

### Online inference

To Enable sleep mode in a vLLM server you need to initialize it with the flag `VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1` and pass `--enable-sleep-mode` to the vLLM server

```bash
VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1 python -m vllm.entrypoints.openai.api_server \
  --model Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B \
  --enable-sleep-mode \
  --port 8000
```

### HTTP Endpoints

- `POST /sleep?level=1` — Put the model to sleep.
- `POST /wake_up` — Wake up the model. Supports optional `tags` query parameters for partial wake-up (e.g., `?tags=weights`).
- `GET /is_sleeping` — Check if the model is sleeping.

These endpoints are only available when passing `VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1`

> ### Notes

Reviewer: For each point, either make it a separate subsection or use admonitions (e.g. `!!! note`)

# Sleep Mode

vLLM's Sleep Mode allows you to temporarily release most GPU memory used by a model, including model weights and KV cache, without stopping the server or unloading the Docker container. This is especially useful for RLHF, training, or cost-saving scenarios where GPU resources need to be freed between inference workloads.

Key benefits:

- **Frees GPU memory**: Offloads model weights to CPU RAM and discards KV cache, releasing up to 90%+ of GPU memory for other tasks.
- **Fast resume**: Quickly wake up the engine and resume inference without full model reload.

> - **API endpoints**: Control sleep/wake state via HTTP endpoints or Python API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **API endpoints**: Control sleep/wake_up state via HTTP endpoints or Python API.
```

> - **Supports distributed workloads**: Works with tensor parallelism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Supports distributed workloads**: Works with tensor parallelism, pipeline parallelism, etc.
```

- **Fine-grained control**: Optionally wake up only model weights or KV cache to avoid OOM during weight updates.

!!! note
    This feature is only supported on CUDA platform.

## Sleep levels

> Level 1 sleep will offload the model weights and discard the KV cache. The content of KV cache is forgotten. Level 1 sleep is good for sleeping and waking up the engine to run the same model again. The model weights are backed up in CPU memory. Please make sure there's enough CPU memory to store the model weights. Level 2 sleep will discard both the model weights and the KV cache. The content of both the model weights and KV cache is forgotten. Level 2 sleep is good for sleeping and waking up the engine to run a different model or update the model, where previous model weights are not needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Level 1 sleep will offload the model weights and discard the KV cache. The content of KV cache is forgotten. Level 1 sleep is good for sleeping and waking up the engine to run the same model again. The model weights are backed up in CPU memory. Please make sure there's enough CPU memory to store the model weights. Level 2 sleep will discard both the model weights and the KV cache (while the model's buffers are kept in CPU, like rope scaling tensors). The content of both the model weights and KV cache is forgotten. Level 2 sleep is good for sleeping and waking up the engine to run a different model or update the model, where previous model weights are not needed, e.g. RLHF weight update.
```

```

#### Python API

```python
# Put the engine to sleep (level=1: offload weights to CPU RAM, discard KV cache)
llm.sleep(level=1)

# Wake up the engine (restore weights)
llm.wake_up()
```

#### RLHF weight updates

During RLHF training, vLLM allows you to selectively wake up only the model weights or the KV cache using the tags argument in wake_up(). This fine-grained control is especially useful when updating model weights: by waking up just the weights (e.g., llm.wake_up(tags=["weights"])), you avoid allocating memory for the KV cache until after the weight update is complete. This approach helps prevent GPU out-of-memory (OOM) errors, particularly with large models, by minimizing peak memory usage during weight synchronization and update operations.

Use `tags=["weights"]` or `tags=["kv_cache"]` to control which resources are restored, useful for RLHF and weight updates. **Note** that `is_sleeping` will report `true` until all components are awake.

```python
# Put engine to deep sleep (level=2)
llm.sleep(level=2)
# ... Get the new weights
# Wake up only weights to avoid OOM
llm.wake_up(tags=["weights"])
# ... Update the weights

> # Optionally, wake up KV cache after weights are updated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# wake up KV cache after weights are updated
```

llm.wake_up(tags=["kv_cache"])
```

> ### Online inference

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Online Serving
```

To enable sleep mode in a vLLM server you need to initialize it with the flag `VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1` and pass `--enable-sleep-mode` to the vLLM server.

#### Server in development mode

> When using the flag `VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1` you enable development endpoints, This should not be used in production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using the flag `VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1` you enable development endpoints, and these endpoints should not be exposed to users.
```

# Sleep Mode

vLLM's Sleep Mode allows you to temporarily release most GPU memory used by a model, including model weights and KV cache, without stopping the server or unloading the Docker container. This is especially useful for RLHF, training, or cost-saving scenarios where GPU resources need to be freed between inference workloads.

> > **Note:** This feature is only supported on CUDA platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! note
    This feature is only supported on CUDA platform.
```

Use MkDocs admonitions

## Benefits

- **Frees GPU memory**: Offloads model weights to CPU RAM and discards KV cache, releasing up to 90%+ of GPU memory for other tasks.
- **Fast resume**: Quickly wake up the engine and resume inference without full model reload.
- **API endpoints**: Control sleep/wake state via HTTP endpoints or Python API.
- **Supports distributed workloads**: Works with tensor parallelism.

> - **Fine-grained control**: Optionally wake up only model weights or KV cache to avoid OOM during weight updates.

Reviewer: No need to make this a separate section, just have "Benefits" as a separate paragraph

llm.sleep(level=1)

# Wake up the engine (restore weights)
llm.wake_up()
```

#### RLHF weight updates

During RLHF training, vLLM allows you to selectively wake up only the model weights or the KV cache using the tags argument in wake_up(). This fine-grained control is especially useful when updating model weights: by waking up just the weights (e.g., llm.wake_up(tags=["weights"])), you avoid allocating memory for the KV cache until after the weight update is complete. This approach helps prevent GPU out-of-memory (OOM) errors, particularly with large models, by minimizing peak memory usage during weight synchronization and update operations.

Use `tags=["weights"]` or `tags=["kv_cache"]` to control which resources are restored, useful for RLHF and weight updates. **Note** that `is_sleeping` will report `true` until all components are awake.

```python
# Put engine to deep sleep (level=2)
llm.sleep(level=2)
# ... Get the new weights
# Wake up only weights to avoid OOM
llm.wake_up(tags=["weights"])
# ... Update the weights
# Optionally, wake up KV cache after weights are updated
llm.wake_up(tags=["kv_cache"])
```

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think the horizontal separator is somewhat redundant

# Sleep Mode

vLLM's Sleep Mode allows you to temporarily release most GPU memory used by a model, including model weights and KV cache, without stopping the server or unloading the Docker container. This is especially useful for RLHF, training, or cost-saving scenarios where GPU resources need to be freed between inference workloads.

> !!! note
>     This feature is only supported on CUDA platform.
> 
> ## Benefits
> 
> - **Frees GPU memory**: Offloads model weights to CPU RAM and discards KV cache, releasing up to 90%+ of GPU memory for other tasks.
> - **Fast resume**: Quickly wake up the engine and resume inference without full model reload.
> - **API endpoints**: Control sleep/wake state via HTTP endpoints or Python API.
> - **Supports distributed workloads**: Works with tensor parallelism.
> - **Fine-grained control**: Optionally wake up only model weights or KV cache to avoid OOM during weight updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key benefits:

- **Frees GPU memory**: Offloads model weights to CPU RAM and discards KV cache, releasing up to 90%+ of GPU memory for other tasks.
- **Fast resume**: Quickly wake up the engine and resume inference without full model reload.
- **API endpoints**: Control sleep/wake state via HTTP endpoints or Python API.
- **Supports distributed workloads**: Works with tensor parallelism.
- **Fine-grained control**: Optionally wake up only model weights or KV cache to avoid OOM during weight updates.

!!! note
    This feature is only supported on CUDA platform.
```

Like this

## Benefits

- **Frees GPU memory**: Offloads model weights to CPU RAM and discards KV cache, releasing up to 90%+ of GPU memory for other tasks.
- **Fast resume**: Quickly wake up the engine and resume inference without full model reload.
- **API endpoints**: Control sleep/wake state via HTTP endpoints or Python API.
- **Supports distributed workloads**: Works with tensor parallelism.
- **Fine-grained control**: Optionally wake up only model weights or KV cache to avoid OOM during weight updates.

## Usage

### Offline inference

Enable sleep mode by passing `enable_sleep_mode=True` to the `LLM` class.

```python
from vllm import LLM
llm = LLM("Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B", enable_sleep_mode=True)
```

### Python API

```python
# Put the engine to sleep (level=1: offload weights to CPU RAM, discard KV cache)
llm.sleep(level=1)

# Wake up the engine (restore weights)
llm.wake_up()
```

> ### RLHF weight updates

Reviewer: Also here

During RLHF training, vLLM allows you to selectively wake up only the model weights or the KV cache using the tags argument in wake_up(). This fine-grained control is especially useful when updating model weights: by waking up just the weights (e.g., llm.wake_up(tags=["weights"])), you avoid allocating memory for the KV cache until after the weight update is complete. This approach helps prevent GPU out-of-memory (OOM) errors, particularly with large models, by minimizing peak memory usage during weight synchronization and update operations.

```python
# Put engine to deep sleep (level=2)
llm.sleep(level=2)
# ... Get the new weights
# Wake up only weights to avoid OOM
llm.wake_up(tags=["weights"])
# ... Update the weights
# Optionally, wake up KV cache after weights are updated
llm.wake_up(tags=["kv_cache"])
```

---

### Online inference

To Enable sleep mode in a vLLM server you need to initialize it with the flag `VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1` and pass `--enable-sleep-mode` to the vLLM server

```bash
VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1 python -m vllm.entrypoints.openai.api_server \
  --model Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B \
  --enable-sleep-mode \
  --port 8000
```

> ### HTTP endpoints

Reviewer: This should be a level lower (`####`) since it's supposed to be under online inference

- `POST /sleep?level=1` — Put the model to sleep.
- `POST /wake_up` — Wake up the model. Supports optional `tags` query parameters for partial wake-up (e.g., `?tags=weights`).
- `GET /is_sleeping` — Check if the model is sleeping.

These endpoints are only available when passing `VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1`

## Notes

> ### Partial wake-up

Reviewer: Maybe we can combine this section with "RLHF weight updates"?

Use `tags=["weights"]` or `tags=["kv_cache"]` to control which resources are restored, useful for RLHF and weight updates. Note that `is_sleeping` will report `true` until all components are awake.

> ### Sleep levels

Reviewer: This can be moved inside online inference

Level 1 sleep will offload the model weights and discard the kv cache. The content of kv cache is forgotten. Level 1 sleep is good for sleeping and waking up the engine to run the same model again. The model weights are backed up in CPU memory. Please make sure there's enough CPU memory to store the model weights. Level 2 sleep will discard both the model weights and the kv cache. The content of both the model weights and kv cache is forgotten. Level 2 sleep is good for sleeping and waking up the engine to run a different model or update the model, where previous model weights are not needed.

> ### Server in development mode

Reviewer: This can be moved inside online inference

When using the flag `VLLM_SERVER_DEV_MODE=1` you enable development endpoints, This should not be used in production.

> ### Platform support

Reviewer: Put this right after the first paragraph of this page. e.g.

```
!!! important
    This feature is only supported on CUDA platform.
```
